Breast Reconstruction SurgeryIntroductionBreast reconstruction is the rebuilding of a breast in women after mastectomy. This procedure involves the use of implants or patient’s own tissue to construct a natural-looking breast. This often includes the reformation of a natural-looking areola and nipple.There are many methods for breast reconstruction. The two most common are:1. Breast implantTwo commonly used implants are(i) silicone devices filled with silicone (ii) silicone devices filled with salt water (saline)Advantage:-Relatively simple and short procedure Disadvantages: -Radiation therapy following implant insertion may cause complication.-The shape of the reconstructed breast may not look or feel natural.-Capsular contracture (hardening of the area around the implant) -Migration of silicone gel2. Flap reconstructionAutologous tissue: Tissue to be taken from other parts of the patient's body, such as the back, buttocks, thigh or abdomen. (i) The latissimus dorsi (LD) muscle flap taken from the back. (ii) Transverse Rectus Abdominis Myocutaneous (TRAM) flap taken from abdominal wall.(iii) Deep Inferior Epigastric Perforator Flap (DIEP) flap taken from abdominal wall.Advantage: -Patients can receive radiation therapy after reconstruction surgery. -Autologous tissue can feel to, look, and move like a real breast.Disadvantages:-The surgery is longer and more complex.-Recovery takes longer.-Removal of tissue from the flap donor site creates scarsThe choice of different types of reconstruction surgery depends on several factors:1. degree of laxity of the chest wall skin flap after mastectomy2. thickness of the chest wall skin flap3. whether future pregnancy is expected4. whether the pectoralis major, pectoralis minor and serratus anterior muscles are preserved after mastectomy5. size of the contra-lateral breast6. size of the autologous tissueTiming for breast reconstructionBreast reconstruction can be done at the same time as the mastectomy surgery ("immediate") or some time after the surgery ("delayed"). Advantages of immediate reconstruction1. Immediate reconstruction is less complex than delayed reconstruction.2. Patients can be spared from multiple operations and general anesthesia.3. Patient does not have to go through the period when she does not have a breast at all. Immediate reconstruction helps patient to restore confidence in her sexuality. Advantages of delayed reconstructionPatients have more time to have thorough discussion with the plastic surgeon and make the decision whether to have breast reconstruction or not.**Not all women are candidates for immediate reconstruction. Possible adjuvant treatment has to be taken into account when making decision on timing of breast reconstruction. It is important for a woman to discuss her options with her breast surgeon, her oncologist and her plastic surgeon. It is also important to note that breast reconstruction after a mastectomy usually cannot create a perfectly natural-looking breast. Although implants and tissue-based reconstruction can both create a more symmetrical and proportionate bust line, neither procedure can produce flawless results. For this reason, it is crucial that patient approach breast reconstruction surgery using implants with realistic expectations. Nipple-Areola ReconstructionThe nipple and areola are usually the last stage of breast reconstruction. The nipple can be recreated with tissue from the reconstructed breast itself after the skin on the breast has healed. The areola may also be created by tattooing the area or by grafting skin from the groin area. Preparation before operation1. Psychological preparation: patients are advised to discuss their wishes with family members, surgeons, nurses and social workers before their decision.2. Stop smoking: smoking increases the risk of complications for all types of breast reconstructive surgery. 3. Stop any anticoagulants as instructed and avoid Chinese herbs.4. Fast after midnight on the day before operation in preparation for general anaesthesia.5. Admit to hospital according to the instruction.6. Bring all your medications to the hospital.7. Remove nail polish and jewellery before admission. Operation procedureThe operation is under general anesthesia and will last for 6-8 hours, but the patient may be required to stay in the theatre for observation after operation, and the duration varies according to individual condition.Possible complications1. Wound infection, bleeding, haematoma and fluid collection.2. Tingling or numbness over the operated wound.3. Flap necrosis, loss of flap.4. Blood vessels and nerve injury.5. Numbness and pain over axillary area and affected arm (9-30%).6. Lymphoedema of the affected side of the arm (6-30%).7. Stiffness of affected side shoulder (8-18%).Aftercare of the operation1. Patient needs bed rest for 5 to 7 days after operation.2. Particular attention should be paid to the new flap. Avoid pressure to the new flap. Wearing of loose clothing and the use of light quilt is encouraged. Nurses will monitor the color, capillary refill, and temperature every hour for the new flap. 3. Multiple drains will be inserted and the drains will be removed 7-10 days after the operation. Special precaution is needed during mobilization on the bed.4. Normal diet can be resumed after the operation. 5. Mobilization is encouraged when the condition of the new flap is stable. It is advised to have your family members to accompany you during early mobilization after operation.6. If TRAM flap reconstruction is performed, do not extend the body and do buckling slightly during ambulation in the first week, to prevent abdominal wound dehiscence.7. Wound care: Over the breast wound, abdominal wound and back wound, small pieces of special adhesive tape (Steril Strips) are applied to pull the edges of the wound together, which need to be kept clean and dry. The Steril Strips will come off naturally or can be gently removed in 12 days. TRAM flap patients with umbilical wound should use sterile saline solution to clean the wound daily and apply the antibiotic ointment as directed. Please maintain good personal hygiene to facilitate wound healing.8. Exercise: Avoid overhead lifting, strenuous sports for two months following reconstructive surgery except regular arm excise as directed. However, most women can resume normal activity levels within six weeks. 9. Keep the wound dry and covered with a clean dressing until the stitches are removed. If there are stitches protruding from the wound, please inform the surgeon or nurse.10. There may be numbness and tingling sensation near the inner mar and the reconstructed breast which will last for a few months. Avoid using hot pad in these areas until the sensation returns normal.11. Pain killers can be taken as necessary. Please inform the doctor or nurse if you feel sudden severe pain.12. Avoid intravenous injection, blood taking and blood pressure measurement on the affected arm. Avoid scratch and cut on the affected arm. Avoid lifting heavy objects and wearing tight jewellery. These measures prevent the development of lymphoedema. Remember to perform regular arm exercise under the supervision of your physiotherapist.13. Sex life: you can resume your sex life after the wound has healed. Share your feelings and anxiety. Good communication can help you to recover and remember sexual intercourse will not transit cancer to your partner. Contact your nurse if you have any queries.Discharge advice1. Attend follow up appointment as scheduled.2. If you have the following symptoms, please contact the Breast Centre at 2589 8151 (office hours) or ward C3 at 2589 8341 (non-office hours):* Fever higher than 38.5°C* Abnormal discharge, oozing, swelling or redness from the wound* Severe wound pain* Lost of vacuum of the drain* Drain fluid less than 30ml in two consecutive days