ChemotherapyIntroductionChemotherapy is the use of anti-cancer (cytotoxic) drug to destroy cancer cells.Preparation before starting chemotherapy1. Discuss treatment planning with doctors, including chemotherapy regimens, courses, possible side effects and the interactions with other medications (including herb and herbal supplement). Also ask doctors the opinion of how to monitor the effect of chemotherapy.2. Chemotherapy may cause temporary or permanent infertility. Your menses may stop. Advice on the contraception methods and family planning can be discussed with doctors and your partner.3. Dental check-up is recommended before chemotherapy. Any heart function checkup (Echocardiogram) is suggested before chemotherapy.Procedure of chemotherapyUsually the chemotherapy drugs are given via a “drip” into a vein in your arm or a plastic line (called central line) put into a vein in your chest. The duration may last for an hour to a few hours.Possible side effects of some chemotherapy drugs and helpful hintsSide effects are variable in different individuals1. FatigueFatigue is the commonest side effect of chemotherapy.Helping Hints:* Get plenty of rest* Accept help from others for such daily life activities as cleaning and shopping* Enjoy some moderate exercise, such as stretching exercise, and brisk walking, which can help you fight off fatigue2. Hair, skin and nailSome chemotherapy drugs can damage hair, causing it to break off at or near the scalp a week or two after chemotherapy is started. Body and pubic hair may be lost as well. Hair loss is temporary and will always grow back once you complete your chemotherapy.The chemotherapy drug may cause skin dryness, slightly discoloured or more sensitive to sunlight. Nails may grow slowly and lines appear across nails.Helping Hints:* Use a high factor sun-blocker cream, hat, scarf or umbrella if you care going out in the sun, to prevent your skin burning* Wear sunglasses if eyelashes are lost to prevent damage of the eye by sunlight or dust* Moisturizing cream can help to relieve your skin dry and itchy* False nails or nail varnish can be used to disguise black lines on your nails3. Nausea and vomitingThis is a side effect associated with some chemotherapy drugs. Nausea and vomiting may last a few hours and may continue for several days.Helping Hints:* Small, frequent meals* Choose food that is easily digested e.g. toast, soda biscuits* Bed rest after eating or drinking* Take anti-emetic medication as scheduled to prevent and relieve your sickness4. Diarrhoea and constipation The lining of the digestive system may be affected by some chemotherapy drugs and may cause diarrhea or constipation.Helping Hints:* Increase intake of fiber, raw fruits, cereals, fluid and vegetables if constipation occurs* Avoid fried & fatty food and raw fruits if diarrhea occurs* Drink plenty of fluid* Moderate amount of exercise* Small, frequent meals5. Mouth ulcerSome chemotherapy drugs can cause a sore mouth and sometimes mouth ulcers. It usually occurs about 5-10 days after drugs are given.Helping Hints:* Get a dental check-up before chemotherapy* Brush your teeth every morning and evening with a soft-bristled toothbrush * Rinse your mouth with gargle or lukewarm saline after each meal. Some of the over-the-counter gargle may be irritate your mouth, please consult the doctor before use.* Avoid neat spirits, tobacco, hot spices, garlic, vinegar and salty food, these may increase abnormal tastes and irritate your mouth6. Taste and smell changesChemotherapy drugs may cause changes in your sensation of taste and smell. These symptoms will last as long as you are under treatment. However your sensation of taste and smell will return to normal several weeks following cessation of treatment.Helping Hints:* Avoid eating your favorite foods within a day or two after chemotherapy7. Your bone marrowBone marrow contains cells which normally develop into red blood cells, white blood cells and platelets. Bone marrow may be suppressed by some chemotherapy drugs and causes decreased level of red blood cells, white blood cells and platelets.* If the level of white blood cells is low you will be more prone to infection* If the level of red blood cells is low you will become tired and fatigue* If the level of platelets is low you will take longer time to stop bleeding      Helping Hints:* Avoid crowded places and people with infectious illness.* Maintain high standards of personal hygiene. Always wash your hands thoroughly after toileting and before preparing foods.* Take care to avoid injury. Discharge advice Attend follow up appointment as scheduled. If you have the following symptoms, please contact the Breast Centre at 2589 8151 (office hours) or 2589 8341 (non-office hours):* Fever higher than 38.5°C or chills* Tendency to develop bruise, or abnormal bleeding* Burning sensation during voiding* Painful sensation, swelling and redness over the chemotherapy infusion site