Breast Conserving SurgeryIntroductionBreast conserving surgery is one of the surgeries for the treatment of breast cancer. The surgeon will remove the cancer and some normal tissue that surrounds it and perform sentinel lymph node biopsy and/or axillary dissection at same time. If the resection margin is close to or is involved by cancer, the patient will receive a second operation of re-excision of the margin or mastectomy. All patients should receive radiotherapy shortly after breast conserving surgery unless contraindicated.IndicationOnly one tumour smaller than 2cm in the breast.Contraindications1. Prior radiotherapy to the affected breast 2. More than one cancer in the same breast3. Cancer larger than 2cm (relatively contraindication, depending on breast size)4. Remaining cancer in the breast after several attempts of breast conserving surgery5. People suffering from Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE) or vasculitis6. Pregnant womenPreparation before operation1. Stop any anticoagulants as instructed and avoid Chinese herbs.2. Fast after midnight on the day before operation in preparation for general anaesthesia.3. Admit to hospital according to the instruction.4. Bring all your medications to the hospital.5. Remove nail polish and jewellery before admission. Operation procedure1. The operation is performed under general anesthesia.2. The surgeon will remove the cancer and some normal tissue that surrounds it.3. The operation takes approximately one to two hours, but the patient may be required to stay in the theatre for observation after operation, and the duration varies according to individual condition.Possible complications1. Wound infection, bleeding or haematoma (less than 5%), which may need surgical evacuation.2. Numbness in the operation site (18-30%), which usually subsides after a period of time.3. If there is cancer involvement of the margin after surgery, a second operation will be necessary.4. Breast deformity particularly to large cancer.Aftercare of the operation1. Normal diet and activity can be resumed on the day of operation according to instruction. You can be discharged home one or two days after operation if your condition is stable.2. The dressing of the main wound can be removed 7 to 10 days after the operation. If the dressing becomes detached or there is oozing of fluid, you are advised to have the wound redressed in the outpatient clinic. Please maintain good personal hygiene to facilitate wound healing.3. There is no need to have the stitches removed. Please tell the doctor or nurse if there is a stitch protruding from the wound.4. There is chance of pain in the operation site of the breast. Pain killers can be taken as necessary.Discharge advice1. Attend follow up appointment as scheduled.2. If you have the following symptoms, please contact the Breast Centre at 2589 8151 (office hours) or ward C3 at 2589 8341 (non-office hours):* Fever higher than 38.5¡C* Abnormal discharge, oozing, swelling or redness from the wound* Severe wound pain 