Sentinel lymph node biopsyIntroductionSentinel lymph node is the first drainage axillary lymph node that drains the area of breast cancer. If the breast cancer cells have already invaded the lymphatic system, the sentinel lymph node is more likely than other lymph nodes to contain cancer cells.The sentinel lymph node is identified by giving a radioactive substance injection and/or blue dye injection into the breast. If the sentinel lymph node is free cancer, only the sentinel nodes will be removed and others will be left behind. If the sentinel lymph node is confirmed to have cancer involvement, standard level I & II axillary dissection will be performed.IndicationEarly stage invasive breast cancer Contraindications1. Palpable lymph node which is proven to be cancer involved2. Previous breast and axillary operation or neo-adjuvant chemotherapyPreparation before operation1. Stop any anticoagulants as instructed and avoid Chinese herbs.2. Remove the axillary hair the night before operation.3. Fast after midnight on the day before operation in preparation for general anaesthesia.4. Admit to hospital according to the instruction.5. Bring all your medications to the hospital.6. Remove nail polish and jewellery before admission. Operation procedure1. The radioactive injection is given one day before the operation at the Nuclear Medicine Department. The blue dye is injected to the breast during the operation. The sentinel lymph node is identified by radioactive tracer and the blue stain of the axillary lymph node. The sentinel lymph node will be sent for frozen section. If the frozen section report shows there is no cancer involvement, only the sentinel lymph nodes will be removed. Otherwise, the surgeon will proceed to standard level I & II axillary dissection.2. The operation is performed under general anesthesia. The incision will be placed in the axillary region (lower hair line). There will be no additional axillary wound if mastectomy is performed at the same operation.3. The operation takes approximately one to two hours, but the patient may be required to stay in the theatre for observation after operation, and the duration varies according to individual condition.Possible complications1. The blue dye will stain your breast for several months. Greenish-color urine may be passed several days after the operation.2. The procedure is more reliable if both radioactive tracer and blue dye are used. There is 5% chance that no sentinel lymph node will take up the dye or radioactive tracer.3. Damage to blood vessels and nerves.4. Numbness and tingling sensation in the axillary area and inner side of affected arm, which will recover after a period of time.5. Lymphoedema of the affected side of the arm.6. If the final pathology report shows there is involvement of cancer in the sentinel lymph nodes, a second operation of axillary dissection or radiotherapy may be necessary.7. Wound infection.Aftercare of the operation1. Normal diet and activity can be resumed on the day of operation according to instruction. You can be discharged home one or two days after operation if your condition is stable.2. A drain is put in the axillary area to drain the fluid and it is usually removed in one to two weeks time. The nurse will teach you how to take care of the drain before discharge.3. The dressing of the main wound can be removed 7 to 10 days after the operation. If the dressing becomes detached or there is oozing of fluid, you are advised to have the wound redressed in the outpatient clinic. Please maintain good personal hygiene to facilitate wound healing.4. There is no need to have the stitches removed. Please tell the doctor or nurse if there is a stitch protruding from the wound.5. There may be numbness and tingling sensation in the affected axillary area and inner arm. The sensation will recover after a period of time.6. Pain killers can be taken as necessary. Please inform the doctor or nurse if you feel sudden severe pain.7. Avoid intravenous injection, blood taking and blood pressure measurement on the affected arm. Avoid scratch and cut on the affected arm. Avoid lifting heavy objects and wearing tight jewellery. These measures prevent the development of lymphoedema. Remember to perform regular arm exercise under the supervision of your physiotherapist.Discharge advice1. Attend follow up appointment as scheduled.2. If you have the following symptoms, please contact the Breast Centre at 2589 8151 (office hours) or ward C3 at 2589 8341 (non-office hours):1. Fever higher than 38.5¡C2. Abnormal discharge, oozing, swelling or redness from the wound3. Severe wound pain4. Lost of vacuum of the drain5. Drain fluid less than 30ml in two consecutive days