Axillary DissectionIntroductionThere are three levels of lymph nodes in the axillary region. The first level locates in the lateral margin of pectoral minor muscle, the second level is behind the pectoralis minor muscle and third level is medial to the pectoralis minor muscle.The first and second levels of axillary lymph nodes are removed during surgery for invasive breast cancer and the third level is preserved. This helps to decrease the chance of lymphoedema.Preparation before operation1. Stop any anticoagulants as instructed and avoid Chinese herbs.2. Remove the axillary hair the night before operation.3. Fast after midnight on the day before operation in preparation for general anaesthesia.4. Admit to hospital according to the instruction.5. Bring all your medications to the hospital.6. Remove nail polish and jewellery before admission. Operation procedure1. The operation is performed under general anesthesia.2. The first and second levels of axillary lymph nodes are removed.3. The incision will be placed in the axillary region (lower hair line). There will be no additional axillary wound if mastectomy is performed at the same operation.4. A drain which is connected to a vacuum bottle is placed in the axillary area. This decreases fluid accumulation in the wound.5. The operation takes approximately one to two hours, but the patient may be required to stay in the theatre for observation after operation, and the duration varies according to individual condition.Possible complications1. Damage to blood vessels and nerves (less than 1%).2. Numbness and tingling sensation in the axillary area and inner side of affected arm (9-30%).3. Lymphoedema of the affected side of the arm (6-30%).4. Stiffness of affected side shoulder (8-18%).5. Wound infection.Aftercare of the operation1. Normal diet and activity can be resumed on the day of operation according to instruction. You can be discharged home one or two days after operation if your condition is stable.2. A drain is put in the axillary area and it is usually removed in one to two weeks time. The nurse will teach you how to take care of the drain before discharge.3. The dressing of the main wound can be removed 7 to 10 days after the operation. If the dressing becomes detached or there is oozing of fluid, you are advised to have the wound redressed in the outpatient clinic. Please maintain good personal hygiene to facilitate wound healing.4. There is no need to have the stitches removed. Please tell the doctor or nurse if there is a stitch protruding from the wound.5. There may be numbness and tingling sensation in the affected axillary area and inner arm. The sensation will recover after a period of time.6. Pain killers can be taken as necessary. Please inform the doctor or nurse if you feel sudden severe pain. 7. Avoid intravenous injection, blood taking and blood pressure measurement on the affected arm. Avoid scratch and cut on the affected arm. Avoid lifting heavy objects and wearing tight jewellery. These measures prevent the development of lymphoedema. Remember to perform regular arm exercise under the supervision of your physiotherapist.Discharge advice1. Attend follow up appointment as scheduled.2. If you have the following symptoms, please contact the Breast Centre at 2589 8151 (office hours) or ward C3 at 2589 8341 (non-office hours):* Fever higher than 38.5¡C* Abnormal discharge, oozing, swelling or redness from the wound* Severe wound pain* Lost of vacuum of the drain* Drain fluid less than 30ml in two consecutive days