Modified Radical MastectomyIntroductionModified Radical Mastectomy is the surgical removal of the whole breast with sentinel lymph node biopsy or part of the axillary lymph nodes. It is one of the operative treatments to remove breast cancer.IndicationBreast cancer not suitable for breast conservation surgery.Preparation before operation1. Stop any anticoagulants as instructed and avoid Chinese herbs.2. Fast after midnight on the day before operation in preparation for general anaesthesia.3. Admit to hospital according to the instruction.4. Bring all your medications to the hospital.5. Remove nail polish and jewellery before admission. Operation procedure1. The operation is performed under general anesthesia.2. The breast wound will be about 6-8 inches long, from chest to the axilla. A drain is inserted at the wound site, which is connected to a vacuum bottle. This decreases fluid accumulation in the wound.3. The operation takes approximately one to two hours, but the patient may be required to stay in the theatre for observation after operation, and the duration varies according to individual condition.Possible complications1. Wound infection, bleeding, haematoma or flap necrosis (less than 5%).2. Numbness and tingling sensation over the operated wound (18-30%).3. Blood vessels and nerve injury.4. Numbness and pain over axillary area and affected arm (9-30%).5. Lymphoedema of the affected side of the arm (6-30%).6. Stiffness of affected side shoulder (8-18%).Aftercare of the operation1. Normal diet and activity can be resumed on the day of operation according to instruction. You can be discharged home one or two days after operation if your condition is stable.2. A drain will be inserted at the wound site and it is usually kept for one to two weeks. The nurse will instruct you how to take care of the drain before discharge. You will be asked to come back to the breast centre for wound and drain care by the breast nurse.3. The dressing of the main wound can be removed 7 to 10 days after the operation. If the dressing becomes detached or there is oozing of fluid, you are advised to have the wound redressed in the outpatient clinic. Please maintain good personal hygiene to facilitate wound healing.4. There is no need to have the stitches removed. Please tell the doctor or nurse if there is a stitch protruding from the wound.5. There may be numbness and tingling sensation over the breast wound. The sensation will recover for most people after a period of time.6. Pain killers can be taken as necessary. Please inform the doctor or nurse if you feel sudden severe pain.7. Avoid intravenous injection, blood taking and blood pressure measurement on the affected arm. Avoid scratch and cut on the affected arm. Avoid lifting heavy objects and wearing tight jewellery. These measures prevent the development of lymphoedema. Remember to perform regular arm exercise under the supervision of your physiotherapist.8. Prosthesis fitting: temporary prosthesis can be worn after the wound has healed while the permanent prosthesis can be worn after 6-8 weeks. It can balance your body so that back & neck pain can be avoided. And it also improves the body image.9. Sex life: you can resume your sex life after the wound has healed. Share your feelings and anxiety. Good communication can help you to recover and remember sexual intercourse will not transit cancer to your partner. Contact your nurse if you have any queries.Discharge advice1. Attend follow up appointment as scheduled.2. If you have the following symptoms, please contact the Breast Centre at 2589 8151 (office hours) or ward C3 at 2589 8341 (non-office hours):* Fever higher than 38.5¡C* Abnormal discharge, oozing, swelling or redness from the wound* Severe wound pain* Lost of vacuum of the drain* Drain fluid less than 30ml in two consecutive days